Sensitivity of Modelled Tropospheric Ozone to VOC Emission Inventories
J. Coates, E. von Schneidemesser, Hugo Denier van der Gon, Anton Visschedijk and T. M. Butler

Abstract
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are detrimental to human health
both directly and indirectly, through their role in the formation of secondary
air pollutants such as tropospheric ozone (O3 ). The identity and amounts of
VOCs emitted into the troposphere are represented in emission inventories
(EIs) for input to chemical transport models that predict air pollutant levels.
These EIs are outdated but before taking on the task of providing an upto-date and highly speciated EI, the sensitivity of models to the change in
VOC input needs to be addressed. We determine the sensitivity of modelled
tropospheric O3 to VOC emission inventories by comparing the maximum
potential difference in O3 levels using various solvent sector EIs in an idealised
study using a boxmodel. We further test this sensitivity using three chemical
mechanisms that describe O3 production chemistry at different scales –
point (MCM v3.2), regional (RADM2) and global (MOZART-4). Under the
conditions of our study, we find a maximum difference of 17 ppbv between
different EIs of the solvent sector, reproduced by each chemical mechanism.
At the end of the seven-day model runs, alkanes have the largest contribution
(up to 40%) to O3 production and the amount of total alkane emissions
specified by the solvent sector emission inventories is directly related to the
amount of O3 produced. These results indicate that modelled tropospheric
O3 is sensitive to the distribution of VOCs specified by emission inventories
and that the maximum amount of Ox produced from an updated emission
inventory depends on the amount of alkane emissions specified.

1 Introduction

Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have an adverse effect on health, both
directly and indirectly as a precursor of secondary air pollutants (Laurent
and Hauschild, 2014). Tropospheric ozone (O3 ) is one such secondary air
pollutant formed from the degradation of VOC in the presence of nitrogen
oxides (NOx ) and sunlight (Atkinson, 2000). Numerical chemical transport
models use emissions of NMVOCs (non-methane VOCs) and NOx to predict
O3 concentrations.

Emission Inventories (EIs) allocate anthropogenic NMVOC emissions
into sectors by source (e.g. industry, solvent use), these sectors are further
sub-divided into individual NMVOC and groups of NMVOC with relative
contributions to total sector emissions. Modelling studies may use EIs to
determine the NMVOC species represented by the model and the amounts of
emitted NMVOC. Despite EIs being widely used as model input, there are
many uncertainties with EIs, such as discrepancies between the contributions
of NMVOC specified by an EI and ambient measurements of the NMVOC
(Borbon et al., 2013), also EIs fail to capture the change in NMVOC emissions
over time (Boynard et al., 2014).

Li et al. (2014) have compared the modelled tropospheric O3 produced
from different EIs used over east Asia using multiple chemical mechanisms.
They calculate the ozone formation potential of individual NMVOC and
determine that highly reactive VOC, such as ethene and reactive aromatic
VOC, have the largest impact on tropospheric O3 production.
Improving an EI requires a large amount of effort due to the diverse sources
and variety of inputs. Before undertaking such a task, it is valuable to know
whether models are sensitive to changing NMVOC input. In particular, how
large are the differences in modelled O3 using different EIs as model input.
In this study, we address the sensitivity of modelled O3 to different EIs
of the solvent sector; we consider the solvent sector as this has the largest
contribution to NMVOC emissions (EEA, 2011) and EIs for this sector specify
differing NMVOC and relative contributions. We calculate the maximum
potential difference in modelled O3 produced by various solvent sector EIs
using an idealised boxmodel setup.

2 Materials and Methods

2.1 Solvent Sector NMVOC Emission Inventories

Table 1: The solvent sector emission inventories compared in this study.
Speciation Comment Reference
TNO European average Builtjes et al. (2002)
IPCC Model Specific Ehhalt et al. (2001)
EMEP Model Specific Simpson et al. (2012)
DE94 Country Specific Friedrich et al. (2002) 
GR95 Country Specific Sidiropoulos and Tsilingiridis (2007)
GR05 Country Specific Sidiropoulos and Tsilingiridis (2007)
UK98 Country Specific Goodwin (2000)
UK08 Country Specific Murrells et al. (2010)

Solvent sector EIs were chosen to represent a range of case studies, including
the european average NMVOC speciation (TNO), a model specific speciation 
(EMEP), a general anthropogenic speciation (IPCC) and country specific
profiles for Germany, Greece and the UK. Two time-points of the Greek and
UK profiles are included to represent the evolution of solvent sector NMVOC
emissions over time. Table 2.1 lists all these solvent sector EIs compared in
this study.

2.2 Model Description

We use the MECCA boxmodel (Sander et al., 2005) as described in Coates
and Butler (2015) without any meteorology or transport processes that
are included in 3-D models to focus solely on the photochemical gas-phase
processes that produce O3 . Model runs were performed using the detailed
gas-phase chemistry of the Master Chemical Mechanism (MCM v3.2) (Jenkin
et al., 1997, 2003; Saunders et al., 2003; Bloss et al., 2005; Rickard et al.,
2015).

Reduced chemical mechanisms are used by 3-D models for reasons of
computational efficiency and these reduced chemical mechanisms typically
represent NMVOC by aggregating many VOC into a surrogate mechanism
species (lumping). Hence, changing the chemical mechanism in a model
also changes the NMVOC input. We also determined the sensitivity of
modelled O3 mixing ratios using the MOZART-4 (Emmons et al., 2010) and
RADM2 (Stockwell et al., 1990) mechanisms which are used for global and
regional modelling studies, respectively. Coates and Butler (2015) describes
the implementation of MOZART-4 and RADM2 into the MECCA boxmodel.

2.3 Model Setup and Simulations

The model is run under equinoctical conditions representative of 34 degrees
North (roughly the city of Los Angeles, USA). CO and O3 were initialised at
200 ppbv and 40 ppbv and then allowed to evolve freely, methane (CH4 ) was
fixed at 1.8 ppmv. In each model run, we used NOx conditions that induce
maximum O3 production by emitting the amount of NO needed to balance
the chemical source of radicals at each time step.

Model runs were performed using each of the solvent sector EIs of Table 2.1
using the three gas-phase chemistry schemes (MCM v3.2, MOZART-4 and
RADM2). A further set of model runs was performed with each EI after
“tagging” each of the chemical mechanisms for the emitted NMVOC. This
tagging approach followed Butler et al. (2011) and Coates and Butler (2015)
and allows attribution of Ox production back to the emitted VOC. As O3
production is dominated by rapid photochemical cycles, the Ox family is used
as a surrogate for O3 production. We define the Ox family to include O3 , NO2 ,
O, O1 D, NO3 , N2 O5 and other species that are involved in fast photochemical
production and loss cycles with NO2 .

2.4 NMVOC Initial Conditions

This study considered an idealised urban area of 1000 km2 with total NMVOC
emissions of 1000 tons day−1 (Warneke et al., 2007). As the solvent sector
contributes 43% to total NMVOC emissions (EEA, 2011), the total amount
of NMVOC emissions in each model run was 430 tons day−1 .
The total NMVOC emissions were then allocated to the individual
NMVOC and groups of NMVOC specified by the EIs in Table 2.1 that
are represented by MCM v3.2 species. When an EI specified a group of
NMVOC then Passant (2002) was used to determine the individual NMVOC
and contributions of the specified group. For example, the TNO EI specifies
a contribution of 8% from xylenes; the contributions of the individual xylene
isomers are listed in Passant (2002) and used to calculate the emissions of
m-, o- and p-xylene in the TNO model run with MCM v3.2 chemistry. The
NMVOC emissions were held constant until noon of first day.

The initial NMVOC emissions and NMVOC species represented by the
MCM v3.2 were mapped to the MOZART-4 and RADM2 primary species
based on the recommendations from the respective literature (Emmons et al.,
2010; Stockwell et al., 1990). The MCM v3.2 species and respective emissions
were aggregated into the MOZART-4 and RADM2 species by weighting
the MCM v3.2 emissions by the respective carbon numbers. This approach
ensured that the amount of emitted reactive carbon was same in each model
run with the different chemistry schemes.

3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Sensitivity of O3 and Ox Production Budgets

Figure 1: Differences in the time series of O3 mixing ratios for each solvent
sector EI using each chemical mechanism.

The sensitivity of modelled O3 to the NMVOC specified by the EIs listed in
Table 2.1 with each chemical mechanism is shown in Fig. 1 by comparing
the time series of the O3 mixing ratios obtained in each model run. The
differences between the highest and lowest maxima of the second day O3
mixing ratios are 17 ppbv using MCM v3.2, 12 ppbv in MOZART-4 and
17 ppbv with RADM2. In general, the model specific EIs (IPCC and EMEP)
produce the largest O3 mixing ratios in each chemical mechanism.

The time series of O3 mixing ratios obtained with the different EIs have
a different spread in the reduced chemical mechanisms (MOZART-4 and
RADM2) than the more detailed MCM v3.2. Using MOZART-4, the time
series of O3 mixing ratios have a lower spread than the MCM v3.2 runs.
With RADM2, most speciations produce similar time series of O3 mixing
ratios except for EMEP and IPCC which are higher than the rest. These
different spreads are due to the effect of lumping the emitted NMVOC from
the MCM v3.2 into the mechanism species specified by MOZART-4 and
RADM2. For example, the TNO solvent sector emissions are represented
using 58 MCM v3.2 species but only 8 are required by MOZART-4 and 7 by
RADM2.

In order to understand the differences in modelled O3 seen in Fig. 1, we
show the first day and cumulative Ox production budgets allocated to the
NMVOC groups specified by the EIs (Fig. 2). This allocation is possible using
the tagging approach which was previously used in Butler et al. (2011) to
allocate Ox production to emitted NMVOC over Los Angeles and Beijing and
in Coates and Butler (2015) to compare the Ox produced over Los Angeles
by several chemical mechanisms, including MOZART-4 and RADM2, to
MCM v3.2.

Figure 2: The first day and cumulative Ox production budgets at the end of
the model run allocated to the groups specified by the EIs, showing which
emitted NMVOC groups contribute the most to Ox production.

Figure 2 shows that Ox production is influenced by different groups
depending on the whether a model run of one day or multiple days is considered.
On the first day the more reactive species such as alkenes (ethene, propene,
terpenes and other alkenes) and many aromatics (xylenes, trimethylbenzenes)
that produce the most Ox . Whereas at the end of seven days, alkanes (ethane,
propane, butane, pentanes and higher alkanes) have the largest impact on
cumulative Ox production (up to 40% of the total Ox production budget).
This large contribution of alkanes to Ox production during multi-day model
runs is also seen in Butler et al. (2011) and Coates and Butler (2015).

Li et al. (2014) compared modelled O3 produced from different EIs used
over East Asia focusing on the representation of individual NMVOC between
the EIs. They calculate the ozone formation potential (OFP) of individual
VOC by multiplying the fractional contributions of the VOC emissions from
its source by the Maximum Incremental Reactivity (MIR) of the VOC. MIR
values were calculated in Carter (1994) using model runs of one day which
emphasises the impact of reactive VOC which produce maximum O3 on the
first day at the expense of less-reactive VOC such as alkanes that produce
maximum O3 after the first day. These results are consistent with our first
day Ox production budgets (Fig. 2), however when considering multi-day
model runs, alkanes have a higher potential to produce O3 (Butler et al., 2011;
Coates and Butler, 2015) which is also seen in Fig. 2.

The cumulative Ox production from the different EIs between the chemical mechanisms (Fig. 2) show similar results to Coates and Butler (2015).
Namely, that alkenes (ethene, propene, other alkenes, terpenes) produce
similar amounts of Ox between mechanisms while the Ox produced from
aromatics (benzene, toluene, xylenes, trimethylbenzenes and other aromatics)
and alkanes (ethane, propane, butanes, pentanes and higher alkanes) is generally lower in the simplified chemical mechanisms (MOZART-4 and RADM2)
than the MCM v3.2.

3.2 Alkanes and Ox Production

Figure 3: Correlation of total Ox production at the end of the model run to
the fraction of alkanes emissions specified by each EI. The Pearson correlation
coefficient, r, is also shown.

Section 3.1 showed that alkanes have the largest contribution to Ox production
after seven days. In this section, we further analyse the impact of alkanes on
Ox production by correlating the total amount of alkane emissions specified
in each EI with the total Ox produced in the model runs. This correlation
between total Ox production at the end of the model run and the percent of
total alkane emissions is shown in Fig. 3. The Pearson correlation coefficients
in Fig. 3 show that EIs specifying more alkane emissions produce more Ox .
In particular, the model specific EIs (IPCC and EMEP) EIs specify larger
alkane emissions than any other EI and in turn have the largest O3 mixing
ratios in Fig. 1.

Solvent sector EIs that are based on ambient measurements specify a larger
contribution from oxygenated NMVOC groups leading to lower Ox production
than EIs with larger alkane contributions. Moreover, the more recent EIs for
Greece and the UK specify a larger contribution from oxygenated NMVOC
than the earlier version, and thus have lower contributions from alkanes.
These results indicate that solvent sector emissions are trending towards
larger emissions from oxygenated NMVOC and that the EIs specified by the
IPCC and EMEP models are out of date.

4 Conclusions

Our modelling study suggests that the choice of emission inventory speciation
influences modelled tropospheric O3 mixing ratios. Similar differences in
modelled O3 are obtained using detailed gas-phase chemistry (MCM v3.2) and
simplified chemical mechanisms (MOZART-4 and RADM2). We have shown
that after model runs of seven days, alkanes have the largest contribution
to the Ox production budget. Furthermore, the amount of Ox produced is
directly related to the amount of alkane emissions specified by the EI.
Emission inventories that are used specifically for model inputs (IPCC
and EMEP) need to be updated to reflect EIs based on ambient measurements which indicate lower emissions from alkanes. We have determined the
maximum potential difference of modelled O3 between solvent sector EIs and
chemical mechanisms using a boxmodel and NOx conditions that produce
maximum O3 . These differences in O3 may be reduced in a 3-D model due to
effects of transport and dilution and should be determined in future work.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Kathleen A. Mar and Galina Churkina for
valuable input during the preparation of this manuscript.

References
Roger Atkinson. Atmospheric chemistry of VOCs and NOx . Atmospheric
Environment, 34(12-14):2063–2101, 2000.

C. Bloss, V. Wagner, M. E. Jenkin, R. Vollamer, W. J. Bloss, J. D. Lee,
D. E. Heard, K. Wirtz, M. Martin-Reviejo, G. Rea, J. C. Wenger, and M. J.
Pilling. Development of a detailed chemical mechanism (MCMv3.1) for the
atmospheric oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Atmospheric Chemistry
and Physics, 5:641–664, 2005.

Agnes Borbon, J. B. Gilman, W. C. Kuster, N. Grand, S. Chevaillier,
A. Colomb, C. Dolgorouky, V. Gros, M. Lopez, R. Sarda-Esteve, J. Holloway, J. Stutz, H. Petetin, S. McKeen, M. Beekmann, C. Warneke, D. D.
Parrish, and J. A. de Gouw. Emission ratios of anthropogenic volatile organic
compounds in northern mid-latitude megacities: Observations versus emission inventories in Los Angeles and Paris. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Atmospheres, 118(4):2041–2057, 2013.

Anne Boynard, Agnès Borbon, Thierry Leonardis, Barbara Barletta, Simone
Meinardi, Don R. Blake, and Nadine Locoge. Spatial and seasonal variability
of measured anthropogenic non-methane hydrocarbons in urban atmospheres:
Implication on emission ratios. Atmospheric Environment, 82(0):258 – 267,
2014.

P. Builtjes, M.v. Loon, M. Schaap, S. Teeuwisse, A. Visschedijk, and J. Bloos.
The development of an emission data base over Europe and further contributions of TNO-MEP. Technical report, TNO Environment, 2002.

T. M. Butler, M. G. Lawrence, D. Taraborrelli, and J. Lelieveld. Multi-day
ozone production potential of volatile organic compounds calculated with a
tagging approach. Atmospheric Environment, 45(24):4082–4090, 2011.

William P. L. Carter. Development of Ozone Reactivity Scales for Volatile
Organic Compounds. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association,
44:881–899, 1994.

J. Coates and T. M. Butler. A comparison of chemical mechanisms using
tagged ozone production potential (TOPP) analysis. Atmospheric Chemistry
and Physics Discussions, 15(8):12389–12422, 2015.

EEA. Air quality in Europe - 2011 report. Technical Report 12/2011,
European Environmental Agency, 2011.

Ehhalt, D., Prather, M., Dentener, F., Derwent, R., Dlugokencky, E., Holland,
E., Isaksen, I., Katima, J., Kirchhoff, V., Matson, P., Midgley, P., Wang, and
M. Climate change 2001: The scientific basis. contribution of working group
i to the third assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change. Technical report, IPCC, 2001.

L. K. Emmons, S. Walters, P. G. Hess, J.-F. Lamarque, G. G. Pfister, D. Fillmore, C. Granier, A. Guenther, D. Kinnison, T. Laepple, J. Orlando, X. Tie,
G. Tyndall, C. Wiedinmyer, S. L. Baughcum, and S. Kloster. Description
and evaluation of the Model for Ozone and Related chemical Tracers, version
4 (MOZART-4). Geoscientific Model Development, 3:43–67, 2010.

R. Friedrich, B. Wickert, P. Blank, S. Emeis, W. Engewald, D. Hassel,
H. Hoffmann, H. Michael, A. Obermeier, K. Schäfer, T. Schmitz, A. Sedlmaier,
M. Stockhause, J. Theloke, and F.-J. Weber. Development of emission models
and improvement of emission data for Germany. Journal of Atmospheric
Chemistry, 42(1):179–206, 2002.

J. Goodwin. UK emissions of air pollutants 1970 to 1998. Technical report,
DEFRA, 2000.

M. E. Jenkin, S. M. Saunders, V. Wagner, and M. J. Pilling. Protocol for
the development of the Master Chemical Mechanism, MCM v3 (Part B): Tropospheric degradation of aromatic volatile organic compounds. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 3(1):181–193, 2003.

Michael E. Jenkin, Sandra M. Saunders, and Michael J. Pilling. The tropospheric degradation of volatile organic compounds: A protocol for mechanism
development. Atmospheric Environment, 31(1):81–104, 1997.

Alexis Laurent and Michael Z. Hauschild. Impacts of NMVOC emissions
on human health in european countries for 2000–2010: Use of sector-specific
substance profiles. Atmospheric Environment, 85(0):247 – 255, 2014.

M. Li, Q. Zhang, D. G. Streets, K. B. He, Y. F. Cheng, L. K. Emmons,
H. Huo, S. C. Kang, Z. Lu, M. Shao, H. Su, X. Yu, and Y. Zhang. Mapping
Asian anthropogenic emissions of non-methane volatile organic compounds to
multiple chemical mechanisms. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 14(11):
5617–5638, 2014.

T P Murrells, N.R.P., G Thistlethwaite, A Wagner, , Y Li, T.B., J Norris,
C Walker, R A Stewart, I Tsagatakis, , R Whiting, C.C., S Okamura, M Peirce,
S Sneddon, , J Webb, J.T., J MacCarthy, S Choudrie, and N Brophy. UK
emissions of air pollutants 1970 to 2008. Technical report, DEFRA, Didcot,
UK, 2010.

N. Passant. Speciation of uk emissions of non-methane volatile organic
compounds. Technical report, DEFRA, Oxon, UK., 2002.

Andrew Rickard, Jenny Young, and Stephen Pascoe. The Master Chemical
Mechanism Version MCM v3.2. http://mcm.leeds.ac.uk/MCMv3.2/, 2015.
[Online; accessed 25-March-2015].

R. Sander, A. Kerkweg, P. Jöckel, and J. Lelieveld. Technical Note: The
new comprehensive atmospheric chemistry module MECCA. Atmospheric
Chemistry and Physics, 5:445–450, 2005.

S. M. Saunders, M. E. Jenkin, R. G. Derwent, and M. J. Pilling. Protocol
for the development of the Master Chemical Mechanism, MCM v3 (Part
A): Tropospheric degradation of non-aromatic volatile organic compounds.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 3(1):161–180, 2003.

Christos Sidiropoulos and George Tsilingiridis. Composition changes of
NMVOC emissions from solvent use in Greece for the period 1990-2005.
Fresenius Environmental Bulletin, 16(9):1108–1112, 2007.

D. Simpson, A. Benedictow, H. Berge, R. Bergström, L. D. Emberson,
H. Fagerli, C. R. Flechard, G. D. Hayman, M. Gauss, J. E. Jonson, M. E.
Jenkin, A. Nyíri, C. Richter, V. S. Semeena, S. Tsyro, J.-P. Tuovinen, Á.
Valdebenito, and P. Wind. The EMEP MSC-W chemical transport model –
technical description. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 12(16):7825–7865,
2012.

William R. Stockwell, Paulete Middleton, Julius S. Chang, and Xiaoyan Tang.
The Second Generation Regional Acid Deposition Model Chemical Mechanism
for Regional Air Quality Modeling. Journal of Geophysical Research, 95(D10):
16,343–16,367, 1990.

C. Warneke, S. A. McKeen, J. A. de Gouw, P. D. Goldan, W. C. Kuster,
J. S. Holloway, E. J. Williams, B. M. Lerner, D. D. Parrish, M. Trainer, F. C.
Fehsenfeld, S. Kato, E. L. Atlas, A. Baker, and D. R. Blake. Determination
of urban volatile organic compound emission ratios and comparison with
an emissions database. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 112
(D10), 2007.
